---
pageTitle: 1
layout: layout.njk
date: 2022-12-13
tags: blog 
updated: 2022-12-13
image: /img/placeholder.png
blurb: Romanticism; the future of energy.
---

# CO2 Monitor

It can be presented as an exercise in accommodating available tools, skills, and the existing supply chain. It is also a useful tool in its own right. 

# APRS TNC

Also a design that reflects the current supply chain.  Use existing code, and chips which are no longer being produced but which are most likely widely available in the population and easy to scavenge.   

# Romanticism and Metamodernism

Some key points from the Romantic critique of modernity:
- there may be useful pre-modern models from which to draw when envisioning an alternative to the modern world
- many of the proposed alternatives to modern industrial economies retain undesirable characteristics around alienation, denial of individual agency, attitudes towards work  
- rather than assuming that labor is to be minimized, one can enjoy good work directed towards one's own goals
- having local, individual / small collective control over one's means of survival has a deep effect on one's political (power) relationships  

The bulk of the Romantic outlook is backwards.  Metamodernism seems to attempt to incorporate some of Romanticism's insights without being as caught up in the past.

# Low Energy Future

In the medium term: it looks as though we'll run out of cheap energy. In the short term, there are many extreme events possible which could have the same effective result. It isn't just a matter of preparing in a material sense; there is a psychological preparedness required.  There is a joy that must be found after peak oil.  

People are not familiar with appropriate technology designs and considerations.  The books and materials that exist are outdated and don't reflect the current or near-term supply chains. 

There are certain sorts of infrastructure that, once built, can last for decades.  Some of this is much easier to build now, with supply chains and energy as they exist now. 

Examples: 
- radio infrastructure could be built now that could last for decades and serve as a medium-distance and long-range regional / international communication backbone. 
- landscaping performed in a few days with diesel machinery (which might take months or years to do by hand) can establish water flows on a small farm that will persist for 100 years.
 
# Appropriate Technology Arithmetic

People don't have a basic sense for what they can and can't do with energy outside of the 'always-on' fossil fuel-powered grid. They haven't prioritized production or consumption accoriding to any identified needs.
 
# Community building

Food as a key focus. Joy and pleasure as a key focus. Art production together. Prototyping a new way of work. 

# COVID, pandemic, risk

If deadly or debilitating diseases persist in the population, one way to retrieve something akin to normality would be to organize into larger community 'pods' within which restrictions are removed but which interact with the outside world with extreme caution (masks, ventilation).

