---
pageTitle: 18
layout: layout.njk
date: 2023-09-22
tags: journal
updated: Last Modified
image: /img/placeholder.png
blurb: Future of FarmHack 
---

Connection to Greer's stages of post-peak-industrialization

FarmHack as anti-proprietary, 'right to repair'

FH as being able to make your own tools

These are 'sovereignty' ... but really that wasn't the stated goal, isn't the goal of most farmers today.  They want 'full agency' ... but often aren't looking for independence from the system -- it's assumed by most that they must engage with the system

But Ramp Hallow makes the point that a lot of farmers have been independent of the economic system, and were pushed into dependence

So: if we consider tech sovereignty, are we also considering economic sovereignty?

Separately -- an analysis of the material basis for farming today, and in the near future. If we're looking for sovereignty, we can't see that the petri dish is 50% covered and not think about the future

Also: climate and economy and materials

And: some sense of concrete projects

Governance / philosophy that is up to folks.  Simply being a container.

# Sun Sep 24 09:16:50 PM EDT 2023

Possible strategies for remaining LOR grant resources:

- all satellite modems
- satellite modems, but set up so that can experiment with radio later
- reduced satellite modem data longevity + use freed funds for radio experiments


# Tue Sep 26 04:01:52 PM EDT 2023

Readings

sovereignty
- freedom
- positive vs negative
- military
- how to expand to include everything necessary
- usually defined with respect to other 'sovereigns' -- state model

sovereignty is a nice place to start. 

both it and open source are complicated.

examples of tech sovereignty

unique nature of energy, food, water, comms, as per hagens

new agrarian movement

tech sovereignty and self-provisioning / subsistence, land 

mapping out the communities

educational sovereignty

legal independence

open source is dated.  
- always was
- now, surveilliance capitalism, lanier, AI

strategies for access to land

downshift; retrosuburbia

internationalization

tensions ...

localism vs international 

big ag vs small ag

urban vs rural

markent vs non-market

organizational control vs. no control

class conflicts

narrow focus vs all-comers

---

romanticism ... anti-modernism

energy realism ... smil

cultural issues

smaje themes

doomer optimism / michaux themes

energy as part of tech sovereignty ... but more fundamental

recognizing that some tech is different ... e.g. difference between comms and databases

smaje's distributism

thinking on the scale of 600 years

alternative hedonism

scaveneged industrialization

donut economics, limits, bounds

the impossibility of electrifying everything

con
---

# sovereignty

confusion between juridical and legal notion, and our tendency to blend that into a concept of power

key place to start: disentangling the notion of 'tech sovereignty'


sovereignty in analogy with politics and land
sovereignty in analogy with code

but there are hierarchies and contingencies that are unavoidable

production of the technology

food, water, shelter, comms, energy

Richard Bourke on the concept of sovereignty: [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kuobgLICp1w](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kuobgLICp1w)

at 3 minutes, notes on how people have used the term 'sovereignty' in terms of power

fundamental feature of the modern state

succession is a rival claim to sovereignty

sovereignty is typically a contested claim 

a conceptualization of power

sovereignty is fundamentally a legal notion

note that (at 3 minutes +):  examples where one reclaims sovereignty but loses power.  sometimes there is a tradeoff.  e.g. you the proprietary software might be the most powerful software. 

at 4 minute mark -- 'claim sovereignty, but practically depedenent on all sorts of other powers on the world'   

'final juridisction doesn't equal power'

'legal concept and practical political one are often confused'

around 7 minutes ... powerful notion of sovereignty by boudoin

notion by jean bodin:  sovereignty should be supreme, absolute, and perpetual

the supreme sovereign should have no superior

should not be accountable to anything else in the commonwealth

should be indivisible

jean bodin and hobbes -- democratic, aristocratic, monarchical sovereign, monarchical preferable

rousseau -- democratic or 'popular sovereignty' -- only form of legitimate sovereignty -- anything else is usurpation

an absolute and indivisible popular sovereignty

(the conservativism of edmund burke: [https://serious-science.org/author/r_bourke](https://serious-science.org/author/r_bourke) )

bourke on burke, englightenment -- chapter excerpt -- [https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/abs/cambridge-companion-to-edmund-burke/burke-enlightenment-and-romanticism/3D8185B51F7F648E80294219D881C5C4](https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/abs/cambridge-companion-to-edmund-burke/burke-enlightenment-and-romanticism/3D8185B51F7F648E80294219D881C5C4)

review of bourke's book on romanticism: [pdf](/img/bourke_wordsworth.pdf) 

---

the way in:  why would we talk about sovereignty in farmhack?

perhaps sovereignty is just not the right term 

but: we should explore why people thought it was the right term

basically: they want control over tech.  they were reacting to that.  the responses to that are several.  are there useful aspects of the conception of sovereignty that might help us navigate our way towards useful next steps.

so -- if we take technological sovereignty seriously -- the things that we wanted that lends themselves to be called that -- i.e. control over our material extistence, autonomy, etc -- then i think to be consistent we need to define them more broadly ... and by defining them more broadly, we actually end up with more than we asked for, with more possibilities ... materially, and politically ... because then we're talking about providing a necessary substrate for true autonomous action and political organizing ... which seem to be the thing that is most needed.

another way in:  at first glance, farmhack is the 'tech' side, and greenhorns is the 'political' side.  but both need the other in a deep way.  one enables the other.  if you can organize to produce your own food and shelter and energy autonomously, then you enable political projects.

some side themes:
- romanticism and anti-modernism
- pedagogy
- salvage from industrial base
- alternative hedonism
- self-provisioning
- pragmatism
- using remaining fossil fuels wisely
- 600 year view
- primacy of energy and other things ... not all the same
- hospicing modernity
- needing the basics of materials and energy arithmetic
- cultural conficts and tensions
- political analysis / commons / industrialism vs non
- open source as outdated concept

  

    



   




