---
pageTitle: 6
layout: layout.njk
date: 2022-12-29
tags: journal-draft
updated: 2022-12-29
image: /img/placeholder.png
blurb: Salvagepunk economies. 
---

# The end of 'high-tech'?

What's the use of 'high-tech' in a world with faltering global high-tech supply chains?  

The future of supply chains is already here -- it's simply unevenly distributed.  For various parts of the supply chain, and in various parts of the world, fragile global, just-in-time, optimized-to-maximize-profit supply chains have succumbed to disruptions (climate-related, political, economic) already. In some parts of the world (as a too-simple shorthand, 'The Global South'), some products were never easily obtained, despite the fact that they might be cheaply and easily purchased in other places.  As the impacts of climate change ramp up, and as fossil fuels become more difficult to extract and thus more expensive, even the parts of the world ('the Global North') that historically have had the greatest access to global supply chains will start to see their access shrink.  It's reasonable to expect that the future of the Global North resembles to some degree the present and past of the Global South.

One way to respond to an impending disruption in access to a resource is to attempt to become fully independent of that resource as rapidly as possible: if aluminium might soon be scarce, then redesign one's infrastructure so that it no longer relies on cheap aluminium. Note that this redesign process itself does not come without cost;  existing practice may rely on a given resource in a complex way, and removing any given dependency may have quite broad implications.

Another way to respond is to find ways of accommodating a dwindling supply of new materials. A given resource may be present in an unused form, typically discarded, and can be salvaged and reused.  Informal economies have developed around this approach.  One sees this happening in the Global South with parts for motors, electronics, bicycles;  one finds this happening in the Global North when people seek to repair out-of-production vehicles. 

Most 'high-tech' products are designed in ways that optimize cost and profit, at the expense of legibility (the designs are increasingly more difficult for the end-user to parse or modify).

# Legibility, Redundancy, Resiliency vs Efficiency, Elegance, Frugality  

A typical modern design would try to minimize cost, the number of parts, size, and the ability to be produced by robots. 

By analogy:  the food system has been optimized similarly:  remove human labor as much as possible, increase throughput, deliver just-in-time, don't store any more product than you can sell.     

Whereas:  a resilience local food system would plant multiple crops in parallel; would store backup supplies of food in case of crop failure; would grow crops that are easier to maintain and preserve by hand than by machine. 

Similarly:  a resilient technological infrastructure will be designed with multiple redundancies; allow for easy repair; may optimize robustness at the expense of cost. 

# Risk mitigation

It is interesting to ask: is the energy and time invested in redundant systems 'worth it'?  How much should we spend on avoiding 'contingencies'? It seems to be an open question, to be answered by individuals and communities.  The default in the Global North seems to be to spend minimal resources on avoiding risks.  One might ask why this is so. Perhaps there are cultural forces within the typical political economy of the North that value efficiency and profit over security and resilience.  When life is devalued and the future is uncertain, it seems unreasonable to waste resources on ensuring an enjoyable future. 

Alternatively, one might consider the sort of peace of mind and security that comes from knowing that redundant systems are in place, and that the risk of calamity is next to nil.  This peace of mind might be so valuable (and enable such creativity, and open up other pursuits), that a (meditative?) practice of preparation might be considered worth it.      

# Overlap with pedagogy

Interesting too that designing systems to be 'legible' to a wide audience, and using older and more robust technologies, also makes them suitable for pedagogy. So if we're hoping to train and prepare the next generation of farmers and nomads, the 'lower tech' approach might be the one to take in any case. 

# Questions / Ideas

- NASA, military, airline, 'prepper' approaches to redundancy and mitigation of failure
- Autopilot systems that have multiple, redudant computers
- PACE systems for communication
- Personality traits that engage with redundancy and backup
- Why do some people consider it worth it? Some cultures?
- Indigenous approaches to redundant food systems
 



 
